Docs: Grafana SCIM provisioning overview (#102183)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/setup-grafana/configure-security/configure-scim-provisioning/_index.md

---

> aliases:
>   - ../../auth/scim/
>   - ../../enterprise/scim/

Reviewer: Aliases are for redirects which I don't believe we need since this is a new page

https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/write/front-matter/#aliases

```suggestion
```

> description: Learn how to use SCIM provisioning to synchronize users and groups from your identity provider to Grafana.

Reviewer: Consider adding a bit more description here. Generally aim for at least 150 characters (it's currently 106).

https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/write/front-matter/#aliases

keywords:
  - grafana
  - scim
  - provisioning
  - user-management
  - team-management
labels:
  products:
    - cloud
    - enterprise
menuTitle: Configure SCIM provisioning
title: Configure SCIM provisioning
weight: 300
---

# Configure SCIM provisioning

System for Cross-domain Identity Management (SCIM) is an open standard that allows automated user provisioning and management. With SCIM, you can automate the provisioning of users and groups from your identity provider to Grafana.

> > **Note:** Available in [Grafana Enterprise](../../../introduction/grafana-enterprise/) and [Grafana Cloud Advanced](/docs/grafana-cloud/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< admonition type="note" >}}
Available in [Grafana Enterprise](../../../introduction/grafana-enterprise/) and [Grafana Cloud Advanced](/docs/grafana-cloud/).
{{< /admonition >}}
```

> {{% admonition type="note" %}}
> This feature is behind the `enableSCIM` feature toggle.
> You can enable feature toggles through configuration file or environment variables. See configuration [docs](/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#feature_toggles) for details.
> {{% /admonition %}}

Reviewer: - [The percent syntax for admonitions is discouraged](https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/review/lint-prose/rules/#grafanashortcodes)
- [Prefer "refer to" instead of "see"](https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/review/lint-prose/rules/#grafanareferto)
- [Write useful link text](https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/write/links/useful-link-text/)

```suggestion
{{< admonition type="note" >}}
This feature is behind the `enableSCIM` feature toggle.
You can enable feature toggles through configuration file or environment variables.

For more information, refer to the [feature toggles documentation](/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#feature_toggles).
{{< /admonition >}}
```

## Benefits of SCIM provisioning

SCIM provisioning offers several advantages for managing users and teams in Grafana:

- **Automated user provisioning**: Automatically create, update, and disable users in Grafana when changes occur in your identity provider.
- **Automated team provisioning**: Automatically create, update, and delete teams in Grafana based on groups in your identity provider, and synchronize team memberships.
- **Reduced administrative overhead**: Eliminate manual user management tasks and reduce the risk of human error.
- **Enhanced security**: Automatically disable access when users leave your organization, ensuring proper access control and compliance with security policies.

> {{% admonition type="note" %}}
> SCIM provisioning currently works **only with SAML authentication**. Other authentication methods are not supported.
> {{% /admonition %}}

Reviewer: - [Don't use bold for emphasis](https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/write/style-guide/style-conventions/#bold)
- Keep documentation timeless by avoiding words like "currently". Currently also implies that this is planned to change. Readers will want to know when this is planned to change.

```suggestion
{{< admonition type="note" >}}
SCIM provisioning only works SAML authentication.
Other authentication methods aren't supported.
{{< /admonition >}}
```

## Supported identity providers

> The SCIM provisioning feature in Grafana currently supports:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SCIM provisioning feature in Grafana supports:
```

- [Azure AD](../configure-authentication/azuread/)
- [Okta](../configure-authentication/saml/)

## How SCIM provisioning works

SCIM provisioning works by establishing a connection between your identity provider and Grafana:

1. You configure SCIM in both your identity provider and Grafana.
2. Your identity provider sends SCIM requests to the Grafana SCIM API endpoint.
3. Grafana processes these requests to create, update, or deactivate users and teams, and synchronize team memberships.

> ## Comparing SCIM with other user sync methods

Reviewer: A noun phrase makes it clear that this section is conceptual and not a task for how a user might compare SCIM with other user sync methods.

```suggestion
## Comparison of SCIM with other user sync methods
```

> Grafana offers several methods for synchronizing users, teams, and roles. The table below compares SCIM with other synchronization methods to help you understand its advantages:

Reviewer: https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#below

```suggestion
Grafana offers several methods for synchronizing users, teams, and roles.
The following table compares SCIM with other synchronization methods to help you understand its advantages:
```

| [Group Attribute Sync](../configure-group-attribute-sync/)                     | ❌    | ❌    | ✅    | Partial    | Maps identity provider group attributes to permissions                   | Limited to identity provider attributes                      | ✅      | ✅    |
| [Role Sync](../configure-authentication/saml#configure-role-sync)              | ❌    | ❌    | ✅    | Partial    | Maps basic roles to users                                                | Limited to basic roles only                                  | ✅      | ✅    |
| [Org Mapping](../configure-authentication/saml#configure-organization-mapping) | ❌    | ❌    | ✅    | Partial    | Maps basic roles per organization                                        | Only available for on-premises deployments                   | ✅      | ❌    |

### Key advantages of SCIM over other methods

- **Complete automation**: SCIM is the only method that fully automates user and team provisioning.
- **Dynamic team creation**: Teams are created automatically based on identity provider groups, eliminating manual setup.

> - **Near real-time synchronization**: Changes in your identity provider are reflected in Grafana based on your identity provider synchronization schedule (consult your identity provider documentation for specific details).

Reviewer: Avoids passive voice

```suggestion
- **Near real-time synchronization**: Grafana reflects changes in your identity provider using your identity provider synchronization schedule.
  Refer to your identity provider documentation for specific details.
```

> - **Enterprise-ready**: Designed for large organizations with complex user management needs.

Reviewer: Consider making this list more parallel to help with readability: https://developers.google.com/tech-writing/one/lists-and-tables#keep_list_items_parallel

## Important considerations when using SCIM

### SCIM and Team Sync

> {{% admonition type="warning" %}}
> Do not enable both SCIM and Team Sync simultaneously. These methods can conflict with each other, leading to unexpected behavior.
> {{% /admonition %}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< admonition type="warning" >}}
Don't enable both SCIM and Team Sync simultaneously.
These methods can conflict with each other, leading to unexpected behavior.
{{< /admonition >}}
```

- **Automated team provisioning**: Automatically create, update, and delete teams in Grafana based on groups in your identity provider
- **Reduced administrative overhead**: Eliminate manual user management tasks and reduce the risk of human error
- **Enhanced security**: Automatically disable access when users leave your organization

## Supported identity providers

The following identity providers are supported:

- [Azure AD](../configure-authentication/azuread/)
- [Okta](../configure-authentication/saml/)

## How it works

The synchronization process works as follows:

1. Configure SCIM in both your identity provider and Grafana
2. Your identity provider sends SCIM requests to the Grafana SCIM API endpoint
3. Grafana processes these requests to create, update, or deactivate users and teams, and synchronize team memberships

## Comparison with other sync methods

Grafana offers several methods for synchronizing users, teams, and roles.
The following table compares SCIM with other synchronization methods to help you understand its advantages:

> | Sync Method                                                                    | Users | Teams | Roles | Automation | Key Benefits                                                             | Limitations                                                  | On-Prem | Cloud |

Reviewer 2: Could you explain what these columns mean?  I'm not sure what you mean.

Author: As Grafana offers several methods for synchronizing users, teams, and roles, the table compares SCIM with other synchronization methods to help to understand its advantages:

- **Users**: Whether the method can synchronize user accounts 
- **Teams**: Whether the method can synchronize teams and memberships
- **Roles**: Whether the method can synchronize user roles 
- **Automation**: Level of automation provided 
- **Key Benefits**: Main advantages of using this method
- **Limitations**: Important restrictions or requirements
- **On-Prem**: Available for on-premises Grafana installations 
- **Cloud**: Available for Grafana Cloud installations

Reviewer 2: If I understand right, team sync doesn't sync teams, but it does sync team membership.  You could almost pull them out as two separate columns to illustrate the difference between using team sync, or syncing teams with SCIM.

But maybe the table gets too big indeed.

Author: Good point, let me think how can we make this table better and clear.

> | Sync Method                                                                    | Users | Teams | Roles | Automation | Key Benefits                                                             | Limitations                                                  | On-Prem | Cloud |

Reviewer 2: We could add more columns to highlight your key advantages section below:

- Near real-time sync
- Dynamically created teams

Author: I think it would make the table too big to be honest and provide repetitive information, as you mentioned those benefits are mentioned below (and at the top as well), so if you don't mind, I'd prefer to leave this as it is. 

The primary goal of the table is to provide a visual comparison to the other methods, so that from a quick glance they can see what features are available in which sync method.

| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ----- | ----- | ----- | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------- | ----- |

> | SCIM                                                                           | ✅    | ✅    | ⚠️    | Partial    | Complete user and team lifecycle management with automatic team creation | Requires SAML authentication; uses Role Sync for basic roles | ✅      | ✅    |

Reviewer 2: It says automation partial - but in the summary below, it says full automation

Author: Good catch, claiming that "SCIM is the only method that fully automates user and team provisioning" is still technically correct, as only role sync is not included, I will think how can we make it clear and less conflicting.

Reviewer 2: I think you should say Full here - since for the ticked columns (user and teams), the automation is full - right?

> | [Team Sync](../configure-team-sync/)                                           | ❌    | ✅    | ❌    | Partial    | Maps identity provider groups to Grafana teams                           | Requires manual team creation                                | ✅      | ✅    |

Reviewer 2: Can any of these syncs be used in combination with each other?  I get confused to see them in a table this way because I would have thought you might use team sync + group attribute sync + role sync for example.

Author: Team sync, group attribute sync and role sync are serving different purposes. 

As we agreed, group attribute sync needs to be removed from here (will push in my next commit), so let's focus on Team Sync and Role Sync.

- Team Sync: Used to synchronize team membership between IdP and Grafana (Note: it does not create, delete or update teams, just memberships). 
- Role Sync: Used to sync user roles upon login from the IdP.

So Role Sync and Team Sync can be combined together. As explained in the "Important considerations" section (which is actually changed in [this PR](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/pull/102478)), Team Sync and SCIM can't be combined, but Role Sync and SCIM can be combined. 

Since this is in the SCIM docs, the main goal is to describe how different are those from SCIM - we can consider adding somewhere else, more generic comparison of all these methods in our docs (outside of the scope of this PR)

| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ----- | ----- | ----- | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------- | ----- |
| SCIM                                                                           | ✅    | ✅    | ⚠️    | Partial    | Complete user and team lifecycle management with automatic team creation | Requires SAML authentication; uses Role Sync for basic roles | ✅      | ✅    |
| [Team Sync](../configure-team-sync/)                                           | ❌    | ✅    | ❌    | Partial    | Maps identity provider groups to Grafana teams                           | Requires manual team creation                                | ✅      | ✅    |
| [Active LDAP Sync](../configure-authentication/enhanced-ldap/)                 | ✅    | ❌    | ❌    | Full       | Background synchronization of LDAP users                                 | Limited to LDAP environments                                 | ✅      | ❌    |

> | [Role Sync](../configure-authentication/saml#configure-role-sync)              | ❌    | ❌    | ✅    | Partial    | Maps basic roles to users                                                | Limited to basic roles only                                  | ✅      | ✅    |

Reviewer 2: Why is role sync partial?  Does an IDP update not auto-propogate the basic role to Grafana?
Same questions for org mapping?

Author: I take them as Partial because it is only limited to basic roles. But maybe we can say that automation is full, but add warning sign and mention that it is limited to the basic roles 💡 I think that reflects the reality better.

Author: <img width="778" alt="Screenshot 2025-03-27 at 12 57 18" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fceef9dd-a31a-4b70-a1ef-56dbe78a2604" />

@sarahleejane I have updated the table taking your feedback in multiple places into consideration, can you please check again and see if this reflects the reality better? thanks for the review!
